---
title: "Collision sports participation and cognitive aging among Swedish twins"
collection: publications
permalink: /publications/2021-06-18-twins
excerpt: ''
date: 2021-06-18
venue:'American Journal of Epidemiology'
paperurl: https://doi.org/10.1093/aje/kwab177
preprinturl: https://arxiv.org/abs/1807.10558
citation: 'Weiss, J., Rabinowitz, A.R., Deshpande, S.K., Hasegawa, R.B., and Small, D.S. (2021). &quot;Collision sports participation and cognitive aging among Swedish twins.&quot;' <i>American Journal of Epidemiology</i>
note: 'accepted'
---
<b>Abstract</b>:
Repeated head trauma sustained in early life through collision sports like football have prompted increased efforts from the public health and scientific communities to understand the long-term implications of adolescent participation in collision sports on later life cognitive health. 
To date, literature has focused on professional athletes and/or concussions whereas fewer studies have examined how adolescent participation in collision sports may shape trajectories of cognitive health in later life. 
We examined the association between early-life participation in collision sports and later life cognitive health among a sample of Swedish twins aged 50 years. 
Cognitive measures included the Mini-Mental State Examination and performance across multiple cognitive domains (e.g., global cognition, verbal ability, spatial ability, memory, processing speed). 
Among a sample of 660 adults who contributed 9,431 person-years of follow-up, there were 450 cases of dementia (crude rate: 47.7/1,000 person-years). 
Early-life participation in collision sports was not significantly associated with dementia at baseline nor its onset over a 28-year period. 
Furthermore, early-life participation in collision sports was not significantly associated with the level of or change in trajectories of cognition across multiple domains. 
We discuss the long-term implications of adolescent participation in collision sports on cognitive health.

---

The journal version of the paper is available at [DOI: 10.1093/aje/kwab177](https://doi.org/10.1093/aje/kwab177).

A pre-analysis protocol for this work is available at [arXiv:1807.10558](https://arxiv.org/abs/1807.10558).

